Alzheimer's disease: immunoreactivity of neurofibrillary tangles with anti neurofilament and anti paired helical filament antibodies.
The origin of the paired helical filaments (PHF) that accumulate in human neurons during aging and in Alzheimer's disease and their relationship to normal neurofilaments remain unclear. The observation that a rabbit antiserum to highly enriched PHF fractions specifically labeled PHF in Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles but showed no reaction with neurofilaments or other normal cytoskeletal proteins led us to compare this antiserum to two monoclonal antibodies, RT97 and BF10, previously found to cross react with tangles and with the 210,000 and 155,000 mol. wt. neurofilament proteins, respectively. Both alpha PHF serum and the neurofilament monoclonals strongly immunolabel almost all neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer cortical sections. Double immunolabeling studies show that both reagents recognize the same tangles and usually show identical patterns of staining of intraneuronal fibrous material. Following prolonged extraction of cortex in sodium dodecyl sulfate, a step which removes normal neurofilaments but leaves PHF intact, almost all isolated tangles retain strong immunoreactivity with alpha PHF serum at an intensity which is slightly reduced from that in cortical sections. In contrast, only a small number of isolated tangles are stained strongly by RT97 and BF10; most show much decreased or no reactivity with these monoclonal neurofilament antibodies. This differential immunoreactivity was confirmed by double labeling studies. Tangles prepared under gentle extraction conditions show strong reactivity with alpha PHF antibodies but again only a small number are strongly labeled by RT97 and BF10. We conclude that neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease are heterogeneous as regards their filamentous content and contain both antigens cross reacting with neurofilaments and antigens which are apparently unique to PHF and not shared with normal neurofilaments.