The 12th J. A. F. Stevenson memorial lecture. Aging, Alzheimer's disease, and the cholinergic system.
Aging does not affect tissues in a uniform fashion. Within the brain, substantial neuronal dropout occurs with age in the cholinergic medial basal forebrain complex, the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, and the dopaminergic substantia nigra pars compacta. These areas are also struck by diseases that are sharply age dependent. Alzheimer's disease causes neuronal destruction in the cholinergic cells of the medial basal forebrain and noradrenergic cells of the locus coeruleus. Parkinson's disease causes neuronal destruction mainly in the substantia nigra but with some destruction in the locus coeruleus. Parkinsonism dementia affects all three areas. Alzheimer's disease is responsible for 50 60% of all cases of dementia. Severe dementia rises in frequency from less than 1% of the population at age 65 70 to over 15% by age 85. The cause of the disease is unknown. No method of prevention is known and present treatments are ineffective, although modest improvement has been reported for various therapeutic regimens designed to stimulate the cholinergic system. The neuronal systems identified as being affected in Alzheimer's disease and in the dementia of Parkinsonism correspond with those shown many years ago to be associated with the reticular activating system. This correspondence permits a new hypothesis of cognition and memory to be put forward, as well as a reinterpretation of data from animal research on the reticular activating system performed over a quarter of a century ago. The locus coeruleus is proposed as the noradrenergic element sensitizing the cortex to conscious recognition of real time events. The medial basal forebrain complex is proposed as the system registering the conscious event for storage and as the readout device when it is subsequently redisplayed in the cortex as memory. Storage could either be in the temporal lobe, in several areas of cortex with feedback to the medial basal forebrain, or in the cholinergic cells themselves.