Alzheimer paired helical filaments: bulk isolation, solubility, and protein composition.
A method has been developed for the bulk isolation of Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles (ANT) of paired helical filaments (PHF) from histopathologically confirmed cases of Alzheimer disease/senile dementia of the Alzheimer type (AD/SDAT). The fresh or frozen autopsied cerebral cortex affected with Alzheimer neurofibrillary changes is dissociated by homogenization and sieving through nylon bolting cloth and the ANT are separated by a combination of sucrose discontinuous density gradient centrifugation, glass bead column chromatography, and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) treatment. The isolated ANT produce red green birefringence when viewed through polarized light after staining with Congo red. Ultrastructurally, the isolated PHF are well preserved and have the dimensions of the PHF seen in situ. Two major Populations of ANT which exist in different proportions in AD/SDAT brains are identified on the basis of their solubility in SDS. The ANT I and the ANT II are soluble and insoluble respectively on treatment with 2% SDS at room temperature for 5 min. Solubilization of the ANT II requires several repeated extractions with a solution containing 10% each of SDS and beta mercaptoethanol (BME) at 100 degrees C for 10 min. Sonication of the ANT II greatly facilitates their solubilization. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS PAGE) of the isolated ANT reveals the presence of two major polypeptides with molecular weights (MW) of 62,000 and 57,000, several minor polypeptides with MW below 57,000, and a significant amount of material not entering the stacking and the resolving gels. Re electrophoresis of polypeptides extracted from various areas of the resolving gel or of the material which does not enter the gel generates the same polypeptide profile as on the first gel, suggesting that the PHF material which does not enter the gel may result from the reaggregation of the polypeptides that enter the resolving gel. None of the polypeptides that enter the resolving gel. None of the polpeptides observed in the isolated PHF comigrate in the SDS PAGE with any of the neurofilament polypeptides, tubulin, actin, or myosin.