OK10, an avian acute leukemia virus of the MC 29 subgroup with a unique genetic structure.
The RNA of defective avian acute leukemia virus OK10 was isolated from a defective virus particle, released by OK10 transformed nonproducer avian fibroblasts, as a 60S complex consisting of 8.6 kilobase subunits. Oligonucleotide fingerprinting and RNA.cDNA hybridization identified two sets of sequences in OK10 RNA: group specific sequences, which are related to all nondefective members of the avian tumor virus group, and a sequence closely related to the subgroup specific sequences (mcv) of the myelocytomatosis virus (MC29) subgroup of avian acute leukemia viruses. Hence, OK10 is classified as a member of the MC29 subgroup of avian tumor viruses, in agreement with classification based on its oncogenic spectrum. The group specific sequences of OK10 RNA include partial (Delta) pol and env genes, a c region, and, unlike those of all other members of the MC29 subgroup, a complete gag gene. Oligonucleotide mapping revealed 5' gag Deltapol mcv Deltaenv c 3' as the order of the subgroup specific and group specific elements of OK10 RNA. The genetic unit gag Deltapol mcv, measuring approximately 6.4 kilobases, codes for the nonstructural, presumably transforming, 200,000 dalton OK10 specific protein and also includes the gag gene coding for the internal virion proteins. Because gag is the only intact virion gene shared in addition to regulatory RNA sequences between OK10 and nondefective avian tumor viruses, it is concluded that the gag gene is sufficient for the formation of a defective virus particle. Comparisons among the RNAs and gene products of different viruses of the MC29 subgroup show that they share 5' terminal gag related and internal mcv sequences but differ from each other in intervening gag , pol , and mcv related sequences. It follows that the probable transforming genes and their protein products have two essential domains, one consisting of conserved 5' gag related and the other of 3' mcv related sequence elements. In the light of this and previous knowledge we can now distinguish two designs among five different transforming onc genes of avian tumor viruses: onc genes with coding sequences unrelated to virion genes, like those of Rous sarcoma virus and avian myeloblastosis virus, and onc genes with coding sequences that are hybrids of virion genes and specific sequences, like those of the MC29 subgroup viruses, of avian erythroblastosis virus, and of Fujinami sarcoma virus.