Studies on the structure of mouse helix destabilizing protein 1. DNA binding and  controlled proteolysis with trypsin.
A mouse helix destabilizing protein (HD protein 1) has been purified and characterized, and controlled tryptic digestion has been used to generate two large fragments of this protein and to study structural changes accompanying DNA binding. HD protein 1, a DNA binding protein that has higher affinity for single stranded DNA (ssDNA) cellulose than for double stranded DNA (dsDNA) cellulose and is resistant to a dextran sulfate elution from ssDNA cellulose, was purified from mouse myeloma by the method described by Herrick and Alberts (Herrick, G., and Alberts, B. M. (1976) J. Biol. Chem. 251, 2124 2132). HD protein 1 was heterogeneous with regard to apparent molecular weight (range of Mr = 24,000 to 33,000), but individual Mr species shared extensive primary structure homology as revealed by tryptic peptide mapping. The predominant species of this protein, Mr = 27,000, was resolved from other species and obtained in nearly homogeneous form by preparative isoelectric focusing. Mouse HD protein 1 was capable of lowering the Tm of poly[d(A T)] by 25 degrees C, indicating that it is a helix destabilizing protein. Sedimentation boundary analysis revealed that binding to ssDNA was noncooperative and that the binding site covered about 6 nucleotide residues. There was a 35% increase in the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence of the protein in the presence of ssDNA, suggesting that structural change accompanies binding. Subcellular localization studies indicated that 75% of mouse HD protein 1 is nuclear, but not chromatin associated, and primary structure analysis indicated that HD protein 1 is distinct from high mobility group proteins 1 and 2, histones, and P8 protein. Tryptic hydrolysis of HD protein 1 produced discrete, large fragments whose apparent molecular weights ranged from 19,000 to 24,000, and whose relative abundance was changed by the presence of ssDNA during the digestion. Thus, a Mr = 22,000 fragment (22 HDP*) predominated in the absence of ssDNA, and a Mr = 19,000, fragment (19 HDP*) predominated in the presence of ssDNA. Poly(dT) and denatured calf thymus DNA were more effective than were other polynucleotides tested in promoting accumulation of 19 HDP*; (dT)8 was as effective as were longer molecules of (dT)n, but (dT)4 and (dT)6 were much less effective, indicating that the binding site involved in 19 HDP* accumulation covered between 6 and 8 residues of (dT)n. Both 19 HDP* and 22 HDP* have the same COOH terminal end and the same affinity for ssDNA cellulose as does the native HD protein 1, indicating that a Mr = 8,000 sequence at the NH2 terminal end of HD protein 1 is not required for binding to ssDNA. Even though 22 HDP* retained the ability to bind to ssDNA, it could not be converted to 19 HDP* by further trypsin digestion.