Angiotensin and other peptides in the control of water and sodium intake.
Several neuroactive peptides have been implicated in thirst and sodium appetite in different species; three peptides are considered here. The best established of these is the octapeptide angiotensin II, which when administered systemically or intracranially causes completely normal drinking behaviour in all vertebrates tested, including many mammals, four or five birds, one reptile and one bony fish. In the rat, in which the original experiments were carried out, injection of a few femtomoles of angiotensin II caused a brisk drinking response within a minute or so of injection at a time of day when the animal would usually be resting. The response is usually completed within 10 min and after the larger doses the amounts of water taken may approach what the animal would normally drink in the course of 24 h. Another response to intracranial angiotensin, seen so far only in the rat, is an increase in sodium appetite. This is slower in onset than thirst, lasts for many hours and the response tends to become greater with repeated injections of hormone. Naturally occurring increases in sodium appetite may be caused by angiotensin generated by the action of cerebral isorenin. A second neuroactive peptide that affects thirst is the undecapeptide eledoisin, which is found in the salivary glands of certain Mediterranean cephalopods. Eledoisin and, to a lesser extent, substance P, with which it is related, are potent intracranial dipsogens in the pigeon, producing behaviour that is indistinguishable from that produced by angiotensin. However, in contrast to the stimulatory action of angiotensin on drinking behaviour in all other vertebrate species tested, these substances specifically depress drinking in the rat. A third peptide that has been implicated in thirst is antidiuretic hormone (ADH). This hormone has a profound but indirect effect on water intake in diabetes insipidus. In the dog, however, ADH in physiological amounts may influence thirst mechanisms by direct action on the central nervous system. In this species, but not in the rat, ADH lowers the threshold of thirst in response to osmotic stimulation and also to infusion of angiotensin. Of these three peptides, and others not mentioned here, angiotensin II has the best claim to be regarded as a neuroactive peptide. It alone is always dipsogenic when injected into the brain and it also stimulates sodium appetite. Whether the effects of angiotensin, on thirst and sodium appetite should be regarded as manifestations of the activity of a classical endocrine system, of a paracrine system, of a neurotransmitter system, or of all of these, cannot be decided at present. But these actions of angiotensin, when considered with its other actions on the distribution and conservation of body fluid, show that the hormone is intimately concerned in extracellular fluid volume control.