The influence of genetic background on the expression of mutations at the diabetes locus in the mouse IV. Male lethal syndrome in CBA/Lt mice.
To assess whether db induced pathogenetic changes in beta cells were restricted to mice with H 2d haplotype, the db gene from BL/Ks was transferred into the CBA/Lt subline (H 2k). A marked sexual dimorphism was observed in the diabetes syndrome in db/db animals. Young adult db/db males exhibited an early onset and completely lethal diabetes (100% mortality by 6 mo). At 3 mo db/db males were moderately obese (43 +/  4 g) but severely hyperglycemic (475 +/  69 mg/dl blood glucose) and hyperglucagonemic. Islets were atrophic, showing variable leukocytic infiltration. Although hyperinsulinemic at 2 mo, mutant males had only normal or below normal plasma insulin at 4 mo. Electron microscopic examination confirmed beta cell necrosis and the appearance, in prenecrotic beta cells, of numerous intracisternal type A (retrovirus) particles (IAP). In contrast, db/db females became increasingly obese with age but remained healthy, suffering no mortality in 6 mo. These mice were only transiently hyperglycemic and were able to sustain hyperinsulinemia. Light and electron microscopy revealed beta cell hypertrophy that was not accompanied by increased numbers of IAP or by necrosis. Retrovirus infection therefore seemed a consequence rather than a cause of hyperglycemia. Ovariectomy coupled with testosterone injection failed to induce severe diabetes in females; castration failed to moderate male diabetes. Instead, biweekly injections of 25 micrograms each of 17 beta estradiol and progesterone effected complete diabetes remission in males. Experiments using cultured CBA/J islet cells did not support the hypothesis that ovarian steroids were directly protective at the beta cell level. This study shows that db gene induced pathogenesis is not restricted to mice with the H 2d haplotype, and that sex steroids are important modifiers of syndrome severity.