Human recombinant interleukin 2 induces maturation and activation signals for feline eosinophils in vivo.
Immunotherapy, with interleukin 2 (IL 2) or IL 2 plus lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells, has been used to treat cancer and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in man. Similarities between feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infection in the cat and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in man have prompted immunotherapeutic studies in the cat. To develop baseline data on hematological responses to infused IL 2, cats were given daily (1 14 days) i.v. injections of 5 x 10(4) U/kg of recombinant human IL 2 (rHulL 2). Complete blood cell (CBC) counts were done weekly. Red blood cell (RBC), neutrophil, and lymphocyte numbers did not change appreciably over the course of the study. In contrast, rHulL 2 caused an eosinophilia in all but the 1 day treatment group. Treatment for 3 days generated a transient eosinophilia on day 7 that returned to baseline by 3 weeks. Five day and 7 day treatments generated an eosinophilia by day 7 that peaked on day 14 and returned to normal values by day 28. Treatment of cats for 14 days did not increase the magnitude or duration of the eosinophilia beyond the 5 or 7 day treatments. Bone marrow (BM) biopsies from rHulL 2 treated cats revealed a marked selective hyperplasia of eosinophil precursors. In the 5 day treatment group, all maturation stages of eosinophils were elevated by week 1 of treatment. By week 2, the early stages had returned to normal, whereas the late stage cells remained elevated, suggesting an ordered maturation response. Numbers of all eosinophil precursors approximated pretreatment numbers by weeks 3 4. Thus the BM hyperplasia preceded the blood eosinophilia by 1 week, suggesting that an enhanced maturation response of BM eosinophil precursors is a major contributor to the rHulL 2 induced blood eosinophilia. In addition to a maturation signal, rHulL 2 induces a potent activation signal for eosinophils as measured by a decrease in density and an increase in longevity in culture. The significance of the activated eosinophil in the therapeutic or toxicologic response to rHulL 2 infusion is discussed.