Binding of the human retrovirus HTLV III/LAV/ARV/HIV to the CD4 (T4) molecule: conformation dependence, epitope mapping, antibody inhibition, and potential for idiotypic mimicry.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the retrovirus that causes the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, is cytopathic for CD4+ T cells and binds to these cells via a complex of the 110,000 m.w. viral envelope glycoprotein, gp110, and the CD4 molecule. We treated virus with several physical, chemical, and enzymic agents to determine their effect on the capacity of HIV to bind to the CD4+ T cell line, CEM. Reduction and alkylation (but not alkylation alone) and trypsin digestion (but not glycolytic enzyme digestions) of HIV destroyed its capacity to bind. If the tertiary protein structure conferred by disulfide bonding is not disrupted, the tertiary and secondary conformations dependent on noncovalent forces appear to be thermodynamically favored, because treatment with denaturants such as sodium dodecyl sulfate, 8 M urea, alcohol, or heat (56 degrees C or 65 degrees C for 30 min) followed by removal of the denaturants did not affect binding. Irreversible denaturation and loss of binding occurred after heating at 100 degrees C for 10 min. HIV binding to CD4+ T cells was inhibited either by murine monoclonal antibodies to the CD4 molecule or by human polyclonal or murine monoclonal antibodies to the gp110 molecule. On the basis of results of binding inhibition obtained with a panel of alpha CD4 monoclonal antibodies, the receptor site for virus on the CD4 molecule was mapped to the amino terminal portion of the molecule. Four candidate alpha CD4 monoclonal antibodies that were potent inhibitors of virus binding (OKT4A, OKT4D, OKT4F, and Leu 3a) were examined for the possibility that their binding sites (idiotopes) might share structural and conformational similarity with the CD4 binding site on gp110. Polyclonal human or rabbit anti HIV sera (that reacted with gp110 and inhibited virus binding) did not react with or inhibit the binding of these four alpha CD4 monoclonal antibodies. Conversely, rabbit anti idiotypic sera raised against each of the four candidate CD4 monoclonal antibodies did not react with virus or inhibit virus binding to CD4+ T cells. Further search or different approaches may yet yield an idiotype that is a structural and conformational "internal image" of the CD4 binding site of virus.