Infection of human fetal dorsal root ganglion glial cells with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 involves an entry mechanism independent of the CD4 T4A epitope.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV 1) has been implicated in the generation of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome associated neurological dysfunction, and it is believed that the presence of CD4 in the nervous system may be involved in the susceptibility of selected neural cell populations to HIV 1 infection. We previously demonstrated (B. Wigdahl, R. A. Guyton, and P. S. Sarin, Virology 159:440 445, 1987) that glial cells derived from human fetal dorsal root ganglion (DRG) are susceptible to HIV 1 infection and subsequently express at least a fraction of the virus genome. In contrast to HIV 1 infection of CD4+ lymphocytes, which can be blocked by treatment with monoclonal antibodies directed against the HIV 1 binding region of CD4 (T4A epitope), treatment of human fetal DRG glial cells with similar antibodies resulted in only a slight reduction in HIV 1 specific gag antigen expression. In addition, preincubation of the HIV 1 inoculum prior to infection with HIV 1 neutralizing antiserum did not reduce HIV 1 gag antigen expression in these cells. Furthermore, we were unable to detect the synthesis or accumulation of the CD4 molecule in neural cell populations derived from DRG. However, a protected CD4 specific RNA fragment was detected in RNA isolated from human fetal DRG and spinal cord tissue by an RNase protection assay with a CD4 specific antisense RNA probe. RNA blot hybridization analysis of total cellular RNA isolated from human fetal DRG and spinal cord demonstrated specific hybridization to an RNA species that comigrated with the mature 3.0 kilobase CD4 mRNA as well as two unique CD4 RNA species with relative molecular sizes of approximately 5.3 and 6.7 kilobases. Furthermore, all three CD4 related RNA species were polyadenylated when isolated from human fetal spinal cord tissue. These data suggest that HIV 1 infection of human fetal DRG glial cells may proceed via a mechanism of viral entry independent of the T4A epitope of CD4.