Multiple monoclonal B cell expansions and c myc oncogene rearrangements in acquired immune deficiency syndrome related lymphoproliferative disorders. Implications for lymphomagenesis.
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and ARC (AIDS related complex) are associated with a spectrum of lymphoproliferative disorders ranging from lymphadenopathy syndrome (LAS), an apparently benign polyclonal lymphoid hyperplasia, to B cell non Hodgkin's lymphoma (B NHL), i.e., malignant, presumably monoclonal B cell proliferations. To gain insight into the process of lymphomagenesis in AIDS and to investigate a possible pathogenetic relationship between LAS and NHL, we investigated the clonality of the B or T lymphoid populations by Ig or T beta gene rearrangement analysis, the presence of rearrangements involving the c myc oncogene locus, and the presence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) sequences in both LAS and B NHL biopsies. Our data indicate that multiple clonal B cell expansions are present in a significant percentage of LAS (approximately 20%) and B NHL (60%) biopsies. c myc rearrangements/translocations are detectable in 9 of our 10 NHLs, but not in any of the LAS cases. However, only one of the B cell clones, identified by Ig gene rearrangements carries a c myc gene rearrangement, suggesting that only one clone carries the genetic abnormality associated with malignant B cell lymphoma. Furthermore, the frequency of detection of c myc rearrangements in AIDS associated NHLs of both Burkitt and non Burkitt type suggest that the biological alterations present in AIDS favor the development of lymphomas carrying activated c myc oncogenes. Finally, our data show that HIV DNA sequences are not detectable in LAS nor in NHL B cell clones, suggesting that HIV does not play a direct role in NHL development. Taken together, these observations suggest a model of multistep lymphomagenesis in AIDS in which LAS would represent a predisposing condition to NHL. Immunosuppression and EBV infection present in LAS can favor the expansion of B cell clones, which in turn may increase the probability of occurrence of c myc rearrangements leading to malignant transformation.