The natural history of human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Although much is known about the natural history of HIV infection, many issues remain unresolved and require additional study. At least four major questions require further investigation. (1) Current data suggest that most HIV infected persons will eventually develop AIDS. The proportion of all infected persons who will eventually develop AIDS, as well as the average and maximum incubation periods, have not yet been conclusively defined. (2) Certain clinical signs (such as oral candidiasis) or laboratory test results (such as a depressed T4 count) may indicate a poorer prognosis. However, the predictive value of such indicators for a specific patient and in an individual situation varies. Combinations of clinical and laboratory data may help refine estimates of the likelihood of developing AIDS or other HIV related diseases. (3) Why some HIV infected persons develop disease and others do not is not completely understood. The role of cofactors for disease progression needs additional investigation. There may be no one universal cofactor for progression but, rather, various agents that cause immune stimulation and reactivation of latent HIV. Therefore, exposure to a variety of infectious or environmental agents (such as through sexually transmitted diseases or injection of iv drugs) may accelerate progression to disease in HIV infected persons. (4) It is not established whether antiviral agents will prevent or reduce the likelihood of disease progression in asymptomatic HIV infected persons. If beneficial, should they be given to all HIV infected persons or only to those whose clinical and laboratory evaluation suggests an increased likelihood of progression? Given these uncertainties, how should the physician or other health care worker evaluate, treat, and counsel the HIV infected patient? Such patients should receive a comprehensive medical evaluation for both diagnostic and staging purposes; the details of such an evaluation are beyond the scope of this review and have been well described. A few brief points, however, should be emphasized.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)