A model for the selective loss of major histocompatibility complex self restricted T cell immune responses during the development of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Functional analyses of peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) from high risk HTLV III  antibody negative and antibody positive donors, as well as from patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), lymphadenopathy syndrome (LAS), and AIDS related complex (ARC) were performed by the in vitro generation of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) and proliferative responses to the HLA self restricted antigens of influenza virus (S + X) and to nonself restricted HLA alloantigens (ALLO). All 40 antibody negative donors tested responded to both S + X and ALLO in the CTL response, whereas six of 14 antibody positive, two of three LAS, four of five ARC, and seven of 17 AIDS patients exhibited a selective absence of CTL to S + X, but generated normal or elevated CTL responses to ALLO. Of the remaining 10 AIDS patients, nine did not respond to either S + X or ALLO, and one responded to both S + X and ALLO. A similar selective loss of the proliferative response to S + X was found. We also observed antibody positive donors who initially generated CTL responses to S + X and ALLO, but lost the S + X response as a function of time. We were able to restore the selective loss of S + X CTL activity in vitro by the addition of IL 2 and, to some extent, by co stimulation with S + X plus ALLO. Depletion of CD4+ T helper cells and removal of autologous antigen presenting cells from the PBL of healthy antibody negative donors indicated that distinct T helper cell subsets exist in human PBL, and that S + X responses must use a CD4+ T helper population, whereas ALLO responses can utilize an alternate CD4  T helper pathway. A model is presented indicating the selective depletion of CD4+ T helper function in the developmental stages of AIDS. The functional test for T helper activity to self restricted antigens may be the earliest indicator of immune functional loss in the development of AIDS, and may precede a reduction in the absolute number of CD4+ cells.