Cellular metabolism of 3' azido 2',3' dideoxyuridine with formation of 5' O diphosphohexose derivatives by previously unrecognized metabolic pathways for 2' deoxyuridine analogs.
3' Azido 2',3' dideoxyuridine (AzdU, CS 87) is a potent inhibitor of human immunodeficiency virus replication in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) with limited toxicity for human bone marrow cells (BMC). In the present study, metabolism of AzdU was investigated in human PBMC and BMC after exposure of cells to 2 or 10 microM [3H]AzdU. 3' Azido 2',3' dideoxyuridine 5' monophosphate (AzdU MP) was the predominant metabolite, representing approximately 55 to 65% of intracellular radioactivity in both PBMC and BMC at all times. The AzdU 5' diphosphate and  5' triphosphate intracellular levels were 10  to 100 fold lower than the AzdU MP levels and, of note, AzdU 5' triphosphate was not detected in human BMC. Using anion exchange chromatography, a new peak of radioactivity, distinct from any known anabolites, was detected. This chromatographic peak was found to be resistant to alkaline phosphatase but was hydrolyzed by 5' phosphodiesterase, yielding AzdU MP. Incubation of [3H]AzdU and D [1 14C]glucose in PBMC and BMC produced a double labeled peak with the same retention time as the anabolite, suggesting formation of a hexose derivative of AzdU. A novel high performance liquid chromatography method was developed that allowed for the separation of nucleosides, nucleotides, and carbohydrate derivatives thereof. Using this highly specific method, the putative AzdU hexose actually was separated into two chromatographic peaks. These novel metabolites were identified as 3' azido 2',3' dideoxyuridine 5' O diphosphoglucose and 3' azido 2',3' dideoxyuridine 5' O diphospho N acetylglucosamine. Following 48 hr of incubation with [3H] AzdU, as much as 20 and 30% of these AzdU metabolites accumulated in PBMC and BMC, respectively. When AzdU was removed from the cell cultures, intracellular AzdU diphosphohexose concentrations decayed in a monophasic manner, with an elimination half life of 14.3 hr. By 48 hr, levels of 0.3 pmol/10(6) cells were still detected, reflecting a gradual anabolism of these metabolites. Elimination of AzdU MP and AzdU 5' diphosphate was characterized by a two phase process, with a short initial half life of 0.83 and 0.24 hr and a long terminal half life of 14.10 and 8.24 hr, respectively. Similar diphosphohexoses of deoxyuridine (dUrd) were also detected in human PBMC and BMC after exposure to [3H]dUrd, suggesting that dUrd derivatives are metabolized in a similar manner. In summary, the discovery of novel metabolic pathways for dUrd analogs demonstrates that AzdU has unique metabolic features that may contribute to the low toxicity of this anti HIV agent in human BMC and also affect its mechanism of action.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)