Cytomegalovirus infection stimulates expression of monocyte associated mediator genes.
Monocytes and tissue macrophages play important roles in host defense against virus infections and, in the case of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and HIV, may also be the reservoir for latent disease. Because these cells can also rapidly respond to most infections by secretion of inflammatory mediators, we were interested in determining if HCMV infection could have a direct activating effect on macrophage cytokine production. To do this, we primarily investigated the influence of HCMV infection on IL 1 beta mRNA expression in peripheral blood monocytes and the promyelocytic cell line, ML 3 as well as the inflammatory response genes TNF alpha, MAD 9, MAD 6, and MAD 2 in the promyelocytic ML 3 cell line. Exposure of ML 3 cells to the virus prior to induction of differentiation had little influence on mediator gene expression. However, induction of the macrophage phenotype by pretreatment of ML 3 cells with the phorbol ester, PMA, followed by HCMV challenge, resulted in a greatly extended period of expression of IL 1 beta, TNF alpha, MAD 9, and CSF 1 but not MAD 6 and MAD 2. Constitutively expressed genes such as lysozyme and actin were not similarly modulated. Both RNA dot blot and in situ hybridization studies demonstrated that infection of human peripheral blood monocytes with HCMV leads to sustained expression of IL 1 beta mRNA for up to 96 h, which contrasted markedly with mock infected or LPS stimulated monocytes. Flow cytometric analysis of the intracellular levels of IL 1 beta protein in ML 3 cells indicated that not only was there more protein produced in infected cells, but that the majority of the cells had responded. Enhanced levels of the intracellular form of IL 1 beta in monocytes was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Cotransfection experiments were performed using IL 1 beta CAT chimeric plasmids together with plasmids encoding HCMV immediate early gene region products. Transactivation of the IL 1 beta gene by region 2 of the immediate early gene was observed in ML 3 cells that had been induced to differentiate prior to transfection. No stimulation of IL 1 beta promoter activity was observed in ML 3 cells that were undifferentiated prior to transfection. In summary, HCMV infection, although not leading to productive infection, nonetheless may contribute to the pathology of the infection through enhancement of monocyte inflammatory mediator gene expression with subsequent stimulation of protein synthesis.