Release of interleukin 1 inhibitory activity (contra IL 1) by human monocyte derived macrophages infected with human immunodeficiency virus in vitro and in vivo.
Infection of monocyte macrophages with human immunodeficiency virus may be central to the pathogenesis of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. The ability of infected macrophages to prime T cells through IL 1 production was investigated in vitro. Purified human monocytes maintained in suspension culture were infected with strain HIV DV. Intracellular expression of virus p24 antigen increased from undetectable levels immediately after infection to 13 59% of cells by 10 14 d; infected macrophages remained viable for up to 60 d. Supernatants collected between 14 and 20 d after infection were examined in the murine thymocyte co mitogenesis assay and demonstrated to contain a potent IL 1 inhibitor, designated contra IL 1. Contra IL 1 activity was present in all supernatants examined after 4 d of infection, and peaked coincident with peak p24 antigen expression. Inhibitory activity was not present in uninfected cells. Contra IL 1 activity eluted after gel filtration with an approximate molecular weight of 9 kD. Inhibitory activity was removed by exposure to heat or acid pH, or by incubation with chymotrypsin or staphylococcal V8 protease. Contra IL 1 did not inhibit IL 2  or IL 4 dependent proliferation of murine T cell lines. Despite its ability to inhibit IL 1 activity, contra IL 1 did not interfere with the binding of recombinant IL 1 beta to a fibroblast cell line. Contra IL 1 inhibited the proliferation of normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells to both concanavalin A and tetanus toxoid; inhibition could be attenuated by the addition of exogenous IL 1. Messenger RNA extracted from infected macrophages was examined by Northern analysis for the presence of message to IL 1 beta. No message was apparent, suggesting that the presence of contra IL 1 was not obscuring the concomitant release of IL 1. Infected macrophages stimulated with endotoxin generated readily detectable message for IL 1 beta. Spleen macrophages purified from two patients with AIDS complicated by immune thrombocytopenia spontaneously expressed p24 antigen in vitro and released contra IL 1 activity into the media. Contra IL 1 may contribute to the immune dysfunction of AIDS.