Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV 1) infection by diphenylhydantoin (dilantin) implicates role of cellular calcium in virus life cycle.
Details of the molecular interactions between human immunodeficiency virus (HIV 1) and its host cell during the infection process are not entirely clear. Building on recent reports by Lehr and Zimmer (1986, DMW 111, 1001 1002) that the membrane reactive, anti epileptic drug diphenylhydantoin (dilantin or phenytoin) (PHT) inhibited binding of HIV to lymphocytes, we hypothesized that understanding the relevant effects of this drug on cells may shed light on aspects of HIV 1 infection. We found that PHT inhibited, in a dose dependent manner, de novo infection of various T cell lines as well as a monocytic cell line. Moderate inhibition of HIV 1 infection was observed with drug concentrations that are therapeutic in vivo for epilepsy (approximately 20 micrograms/ml), and no concentrations used induced deleterious effects on cell growth or viability. Surprisingly, treatment of chronically infected H9 cells reduced HIV p24 expression within 1 6 weeks according to dose. This apparent induction into latency was not inhibited by cotreatment of the chronically infected cells with 5 azacytidine, which indicated that PHT was not inducing latency by induction of methylation of the viral DNA. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that PHT did not significantly reduce cell surface expression of CD4. The possibility remained that the drug inhibited HIV infection due to its known effects on calcium dependent cellular processes. Subsequent measurements of intracellular calcium demonstrated that an increase of [Ca2+]i occurred at least 24 hr postinfection, prior to synthesis of detectable viral structural protein p24, and that this virus induced increase in [Ca2+]i was not due to binding of HIV to the cell. This HIV induced rise in [Ca2+]i was significantly inhibited by PHT. PHT demonstrated variable inhibitory effects on infection of normal PHA stimulated PBLs cultured in vitro, but it was synergistic to low dose AZT (0.01 microgram/ml) in inhibiting infection of cell lines. Because of the known inhibitory effects of PHT on calcium dependent biochemical processes in the cell, inhibition of HIV 1 infection by PHT suggests that calcium may play a role in HIV infection and maintenance. The drug may also be a candidate therapy for individuals infected with HIV.