The microbiology of HIV associated periodontal lesions.
2 intraoral lesions associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection  have recently been described: an atypical gingivitis and a rapidly progressive periodontitis. The microbiota associated with these gingival and periodontal lesions was investigated. Subgingival plaque samples were taken from 45 HIV seropositive homosexual men and from 44 HIV seronegative control subjects. Each sampled site was clinically and radiographically classified as HIV associated gingivitis, HIV associated periodontitis, healthy in an HIV seropositive subject, or healthy, conventional gingivitis or classical periodontitis in a control subject. Plaque samples were examined by indirect immunofluorescence with polyclonal antisera to detect Bacteroides gingivalis, B. intermedius, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans. Anaerobic culturing was used to detect black pigmented Bacteroides species, Fusobacterium species, and A. actinomycetemcomitans to confirm the immunofluorescence findings. We detected B. gingivalis, B. intermedius, F. nucleatum, and A. actinomycetemcomitans in significantly more HIV periodontitis sites (80, 65, 59 and 61% of sites, respectively) and HIV gingivitis sites (61, 70, 52 and 52%, respectively) than in HIV seropositive healthy and control sites (p less than 0.05). The results indicate that the microbiota found in HIV periodontitis is similar to that of classical periodontitis. In contrast, however, the microbiota associated with HIV gingivitis is strikingly different from that of conventional gingivitis. The similarity in the prevalence of periodontopathic organisms in both HIV gingivitis and HIV periodontitis suggests that the HIV gingivitis lesion may be a precursor to the tissue destruction observed in HIV periodontitis. Hence, early detection and treatment of the HIV gingivitis lesion may prevent the rapid and extensive breakdown of periodontal tissues associated with HIV periodontitis.